# vim: tw=70:

=pod

=head1 NAME

upgrade-14-to-15.pod

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Where we discuss updating your database and config files from CMap's
version 0.14 to 0.15.

=head1 INTRODUCTION

Congratulations on your decision to upgrade from CMap version 0.14 to
0.15.  This guide will take you through how to modify your database
(and the data inside) as well as converting you configuration files.

Please make sure you back up both your database and you config files.
While this process has been tested, it is best not to take any
chances.

=head1 INSTALLING VERSION 0.15

Then run the build commands as you normally would 

 $ perl Build.PL
 $ ./Build
 $ su
 # ./Build install

Make sure the new template files have been added by doing a 

 # cp -f templates/*.tmpl /usr/local/apache/templates/cmap/

=head1 DATABASE UPDATE

To make the necessary changes to your database, please do the
following:

=over 4

=item * 

Either back up your database or create a new database to work on,
e.g., for MySQL:

  $ mysqldump cmap14 > cmap15.sql
  $ mysqladmin create cmap15
  $ mysql cmap15 < cmap15.sql

And then work on the "cmap15" database.

=item * 

Execute "cmap_14_to_cmap_15.sql" on your database.  This modifies your
data in place, which is why it is essential that you back up your data
in case anything happens during the upgrade process.  

With MySQL the command looks something like this:

  $ mysql -uroot -p CMAP < cmap_14_to_cmap_15.sql

Now your database should have some new columns that are filled with
data.

=item * 

If your database has xrefs and attributes that make use of the CMap
objects (as described in attributes-and-xrefs.pod), then you will need
to run the upgrade_attributes_xrefs_14_to_15.pl script to update them
to the new nomenclature.

This script has two modes.  One will tell you if changes need to be
made and the other will actually make the changes.

=over 4

=item - Check the database

Check the database for any changes that need to be made.

  $ upgrade_attributes_xrefs_14_to_15.pl -d data_source > needed_changes_file

The data_source value specifies the data_source value to be used as
found in the individual config files.

The STDOUT output is tab delimited and it gives the type (attribute or
xref), the ID and the upgraded value.

If a deprecated value is used, it will print a warning in the STDOUT
output as well.

=item - Make the changes

To commit the suggested changes call it again with the commit flag.

  $ upgrade_attributes_xrefs_14_to_15.pl -d data_source -c > changes_file

For each changed value, this will print the ID, the previous value and
the new value.  You can print this to a file (as above) and save it in
case anything goes wrong.

=back

With that done, the xrefs and attributes should work the same way as
they did before the upgrade.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILE UPDATE

To use your old config files with CMap version 0.15, you will need to
make some changes.

There is now a config file validator for the individual datasource
config files, cmap_validate_import_file.pl (previously known as
validate_import_file.pl).  It is located in the bin directory.  Simply
run it on your config files and it will tell you if it is valid and
what is wrong if it is invalid, as well as list possible options that
you could be using.

To change to modify your current v0.14 config, please do the following:

=over 4

=item *

Go into your configuration directory:

  $ cd /usr/local/apache/conf/cmap.conf/

=item *

Back up your old config files (although you should have done this
before you got to this point).

  $ cp data_source1.conf data_source1.v0.14

=item *

Run upgrade_config_14_to_15.pl on the old config file.

  $ /usr/local/src/cmap/upgrade/upgrade_config_14_to_15.pl data_source1.conf

This will create a new file with a '.15' suffix.  Move that file over
the original (which you backed up, right?).

  $ mv data_source1.conf.15 data_source1.conf

=item *

Run the config file validator on the new config file and fix any
problems that it tells you about.

  $ /usr/local/src/cmap/bin/cmap_validate_import_file.pl data_source1.conf

Note: In previous releases, was known as validate_import_file.pl.

Be sure to check the output of this to see if there are any options
that you want to be using but aren't.  There are several new options.
Explanations of the options are in docs/Administration.pod.

=item *

Check the example global config file, conf/global.conf, for new
options that you may want to use.  There are at least 5 new options
for this file.

=back

=head1 LIMIT QUERY CACHE SIZE

Starting with version 0.15, CMap uses a SizeAwareFileCache system for
caching queries.  This means that you can set up a cron job that will
limit the disk space taken up by file cache.

Simply, run cmap_reduce_cache_size.pl regularily to limit the growth
of the query cache files.

  $ cmap_reduce_cache_size.pl

This script cycles through each CMap data_source and (using the
Cache::SizeAwareFileCache functionality) reduces the size of the query
cache to the value given as 'max_query_cache_size' in the config file.

If 'max_query_cache_size' is not set, it will use the default value in
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Constants.

It is suggested that this script is run periodically as a cron job.


=head1 CONCLUSION

That should do it for the upgrade process.  If you have any troubles
email the CMap developer's list:

  gmod-cmap@lists.sourceforge.net

Please see the CMap home page (http://www.gmod.org/cmap/index.shtml)
for other information and patches.

=head1 AUTHOR

Ben Faga E<lt>faga@cshl.eduE<gt>.

=cut
