# vim: tw=70:

=pod

=head1 NAME

upgrade-13-to-14.pod

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Where we discuss updating your CMap's version 0.13 to 0.14.

=head1 INTRODUCTION

Congratulations on your decision to upgrade from CMap version 0.13 to
0.14.  This guide will take you through how to modify your database
(and the data inside).  

Version 0.14 is simply a bug fix release with some minor features
added.

Please make sure you back up both your database and you config files.
While this process has been tested, it is best not to take any
chances.

=head1 INSTALLING VERSION 0.14

Then run the build commands as you normally would 

 $ perl Build.PL
 $ ./Build
 $ su
 # ./Build install

Make sure the new template files have been added by doing a 

 # cp -f templates/*.tmpl /usr/local/apache/templates/cmap/

=head1 DATABASE UPDATE

The database update isn't required and is only useful if you plan on
using the score for the correspondence evidences.

This is basically a fix for MySQL's truncating the score value.  When
inserting e-scores, such as '1e-27', into the score column, it was
being returned as '0'.  

If you use another RDBMS the problem may not exist.  Please test for
this and then convert the sql provided to suit your RDBMS.

To make the change to your database, please do the following:

=over 4

=item * 

Either back up your database or create a new database to work on,
e.g., for MySQL:

  $ mysqldump cmap13 > cmap13.sql
  $ mysqladmin create cmap14
  $ mysql cmap14 < cmap14.sql

And then work on the "cmap14" database.

=item * 

Execute "cmap_13_to_cmap_14.sql" on your database.  This modifies your
data in place, which is why it is essential that you back up your data
in case anything happens during the upgrade process.  

With MySQL the command looks something like this:

  $ mysql -uroot -p cmap14 < cmap_13_to_cmap_14.sql

Now your database should have some new column definition for the score
field in cmap_correspondence_evidence.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILE UPDATE

The config files did not change between version 0.13 and 0.14

=head1 CONCLUSION

That should do it for the databases and the configuration.  If you
have any troubles email the CMap developer's list:

  gmod-cmap@lists.sourceforge.net

Please see the CMap home page (http://www.gmod.org/cmap/index.shtml)
for other information and patches.

=head1 AUTHOR

Ben Faga E<lt>faga@cshl.eduE<gt>.

=cut
