# vim: tw=70:

=pod

=head1 NAME

upgrade-16-to-1.0.pod

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Where we discuss updating CMap from version 0.16 to 1.0.

=head1 INTRODUCTION

Congratulations on your decision to upgrade from CMap version 1.0 to
1.01.  This guide will take you through the upgrade of the software.
 
Please make sure you back up both your database and you configuration
files.  While this process has been tested, it is best not to take any
chances.

=head1 INSTALLING VERSION 1.1

Run the build commands as you normally would 

 $ perl Build.PL
 $ ./Build
 $ su
 # ./Build install

Make sure the new template files have been added by doing a 

 # cp -f templates/*.tmpl /usr/local/apache/templates/cmap/

=head1 DATABASE UPDATE

There is no Database change between versions 1.0 and 1.01.

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILE UPDATE

There are no required changes to the configuration files.  It is a
good idea to validate the individual configuration files.

=head2 CONFIGURATION VALIDATION

Validate individual using the validation script,
cmap_validate_config.pl, included with the distribution.

  $ cmap_validate_config.pl /path/to/cmap.conf/example.conf > output_file

The output lists any problems with the configuration file as well as
any optional configuration options that are not being used.  The last
line will tell you if the file is valid.  

If the is reported as "INVALID" on the last line, look through the
output for the reasons it was declared INVALID.

Note: It will probably report "unit_granularity" as missing for map
types.  This value is the smallest unit that the map can be broken
into.  For example, a sequence has a unit_granularity of 1 whereas a
genetic map might have a granularity of .01. 

=head2 NEW USEFUL CONFIGURATIONS

The following are some of the more useful configurations that have
been added.  See the ADMINISTRATION document for more information.

=over 4

=item *  dotplot_ps 

Sets the size of the lines in the dotplot view.  Must be a positive
integer.  It defaults to 1.

=back

=head1 CONCLUSION

That should do it for the upgrade process.  If you have any troubles
email the CMap developer's list:

  gmod-cmap@lists.sourceforge.net

Please see the CMap home page (http://www.gmod.org/CMap) for other
information and patches.

=head1 AUTHOR

Ben Faga E<lt>faga@cshl.eduE<gt>.

=cut
