=head1 NAME

CMAP Attributes and Cross-References

=head1 INTRODUCTION

Up to version 0.10, CMap has only stored just enough information on maps and
features to draw images.  This has had the effect of forcing curators to set up
external sources for richer data and users to leave CMap to view this data via
cross-references.  Additionally, these cross-references could only be attached
to features (i.e., not to any other CMap objects like map sets, maps, etc.).
This has had the effect of burdening non-technical curators to create external
applications for housing this data and hindering the ability of curators to
provide details on every part of the system that needs annotation.

It is important to note that attributes and cross-references for feature types,
map types and evidence types are now defined in the configuation files.  Please
see the Administration documentation for more information.

=head1 ATTRIBUTE TABLE

As it would be impossible to construct tables with the fields to
satisfy any potential user of CMap, it was decided to create a generic
"attributes" table to allow any number of arbitrary key/value pairs of
data to be attached to any CMap database object a user can view.  The
table looks like this:

  CREATE TABLE cmap_attribute (
    attribute_id    int(11)      NOT NULL default '0',
    table_name      varchar(30)  NOT NULL default '',
    object_id       int(11)      NOT NULL default '0',
    display_order   int(11)      NOT NULL default '1',
    is_public       tinyint(4)   NOT NULL default '1',
    attribute_name  varchar(200) NOT NULL default '',
    attribute_value text         NOT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY (attribute_id)
  );

The curator can use the "display_order" to determine the order in
which to place the attributes and can hide certain attributes from the
public by flagging "is_public" to "0."  An attribute can have any name
up to 200 characters, and attribute names can be repeated as often as
desired (e.g., a map feature has several "Genbank ID" attributes).
The value of the attribute is limited mostly by the data type of the
target database (note that for Oracle the field is currently
"VARCHAR2(4000)" because CLOB fields are a PITA).

=head1 XREF TABLE

The new cross-reference system works much the same, and, in fact, the
table looks very similar:

  CREATE TABLE cmap_xref (
    xref_id       int(11)      NOT NULL default '0',
    table_name    varchar(30)  NOT NULL default '',
    object_id     int(11)               default NULL,
    display_order int(11)      NOT NULL default '1',
    xref_name     varchar(200) NOT NULL default '',
    xref_url      text         NOT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY  (XREF_ID)
  );

There is no "is_public" flag, but otherwise the table is essentially
the same.  And, if you think about it, there is little to keep one
from using an "attribute" as a cross-reference.  Simply make the
"attribute_name" "DBXRef" and the "attribute_value" something like this:

  <a href="/perl/pub_search?ref_id=4143">Singh et al., 
  1996.  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93: 6163-6168</a>

However, it was decided to split the cross-references out to a
separate system for a couple of reasons:

=over 4

=item 1 

Forcing the curator to create a full HTML anchor for the value is
ugly.  It's more appropriately done by code. As a side note, the code
tries to automatically detect any "attribute_value" that looks like a
raw URL (if it begins with "http://") and make an anchor around it.

=item 2

Attributes need to be attached to individual database objects, but
xrefs need to be able to apply a template to a class of objects, e.g.,
all "species" objects (notice that the xref table allows NULL
values for the "object_id" field).

=back

For more on the second point, suppose one had a system to link to similar 
map sets and from the "Sap Set" page, wanted to create a link to lookup 
the similar map sets.  The xref could look like this:

  Name: View Similar Map Sets
  URL : /similar_map_sets/similar_map_sets?map_set_aid=[% object.accession %]

A couple things to notice:

=over 4

=item *   

The templating language (the stuff between the "[%" and "%]" tags) is
Template Toolkit (http://www.template-toolkit.com/).  TT is a Perl
module available from CPAN as "Template" and is used by CMap for
processing all the HTML templates.  Because Template Toolkit is
already used by CMap, it was decided to stick with it for processing
these mini-templates.  The syntax is simpler than Perl, is quite
powerful, and should allow most anything people will want.

=item *   

The URL template will always refer to the object (the map or feature
or whatever) as "object."  See the next section for field names.

=back

=head1 AVAILABLE FIELDS

Following is a list the fields available for each object on the given
page.  The default source table for the fields is given at the top.
Any data that does not come from that table is specified either by
"[table]" or "[table.column]."  In all cases a field ending in "_aid"
refers to an "accession_id" field.  Because most every table contains
a field called "accession_id," it is easiest to differentiate them as
"species_aid" for "cmap_species.accesion_id." 

=head2 Map Set Info (/cmap/map_set_info)

Table: cmap_map_set

  map_set_id
  map_set_aid          (accession_id)
  map_set_name
  map_set_short_name
  map_type_accession
  species_id
  can_be_reference_map
  map_units
  species_aid          [cmap_species.accession_id]
  species_common_name          [cmap_species]
  species_full_name            [cmap_species]

=head2 Map Details (/cmap/map_details)

Table: cmap_map

  map_aid      (accession_id)
  map_name
  map_start
  map_stop
  map_units
  map_set_aid  [cmap_map_set.accession_id]
  map_set_name [cmap_map_set.map_set_short_name]
  species_aid  [cmap_species.accession_id]
  species_common_name [cmap_species.species_common_name]

=head2 Feature Details (/cmap/feature)

Table: cmap_feature

  feature_id 
  feature_aid      (accession_id)
  map_id
  map_set_id 
  feature_type_accession
  feature_name
  is_landmark
  feature_start
  feature_stop
  aliases          [cmap_feature_alias.alias] *
  correspondences  [cmap_feature_correspondence] *
  map_name         [cmap_map]
  map_aid          [cmap_map.accession_id]
  map_set_aid      [cmap_map_set.accession_id]
  map_set_name     [cmap_map_set.map_set_short_name ]
  species_id       [cmap_species]
  species_common_name     [cmap_species.species_common_name]
  map_type_aid     [cmap_map.accession_id]
  map_units        [cmap_map_set.map_units]

=head2 Feature Type Info (/cmap/feature_type_info)

Table: cmap_feature_type

  feature_type_accession 
  feature_type
  shape
  color

=head2 Feature Alias Info (/cmap/feature_alias)

Table: cmap_feature_alias

  feature_alias_id
  alias
  feature_aid  [cmap_feature.accession_id]
  feature_name [cmap_feature.feature_name]

=head2 Map Type Info (/cmap/map_type_info)

Table: cmap_map_type

  map_type_accession
  map_type
  map_units
  is_relational_map
  shape
  color
  width
  display_order

=head2 Evidence Type Info (/cmap/evidence_type_info)

Table: cmap_evidence_type

  evidence_type_accession
  evidence_type
  rank
  line_color

=head2 Species Info (/cmap/species_info)

Table: cmap_species

  species_id
  species_aid (accession_id)
  species_common_name
  species_full_name
  display_order

=head2 Correspondence Details (/cmap/correspondence)

Table: cmap_feature_correspondence

  feature_correspondence_id
  accession_id
  feature_id1
  feature_id2
  is_enabled

B<Note:> The starred fields ("*") denote plural fields.  See discussion
about attributes.

=head1 ACCESSING ATTRIBUTES FOR XREFS

In addition to the above fields, each object on the above pages will
also include any attributes the curator has created.  This can be
accessed by calling "object.attribute.attribute_name" where
"attribute_name" is whatever name the curator assigned to the
attribute.  This name will be lowercased and all spaces will be
collapsed and turned into underscores.  To take the earlier example,
suppose we have a feature with three "Genbank ID" attributes:

  Feature Name    : SHO29
  Attribute Name  : Genbank ID
  Attribute Values: "BH245189", "BH245190," "BH245191"

(This would actually exist as three attributes each of the name
"Genbank ID".)

This attribute would be accessed like so:

  object.attribute.genbank_id

B<Note:> If you intend to create certain fields as non-public, it
might be easiest to name the fields with all-lowercase letters and
underscores so there is no confusion when accessing the attribute.

Because attribute names can be repeated for any object, the values of
any attribute will always be an array.  Consider it a permanently
"plural" field in which each member needs to be dealt with
individually (even if there is actually only one attribute of a
particular name for a particular object).  Whenever you create a
template which uses a "plural" field like this, you will need to use a
"FOREACH" loop.  The return value of the processed template will be
simple text, so in order for the CMap code to sort out each URL for
each attribute value, you will need to simply separate them with
spaces.  This is logical if you consider that spaces are not legal
syntax in URLs.  It's also easy if you use some simple formatting in
the URL template.  E.g., these two versions of the Genbank xref will
work:

  Name: View Genank Info
  URL : 

  [% FOREACH id=object.attribute.genbank_id %]
  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/viewer.fcgi?val=[% id %]
  [% END %]

  Name: View Genank Info
  URL : [% FOREACH id=object.attribute.genbank_id; "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/viewer.fcgi?val=$id "; END %]

(Notice the extra space after "$id" and before the semicolon.  This is
what CMap will use to split the URLs.)

If an object has no "Genbank ID" attributes, then nothing will be
returned.  If an object has five Genbank IDs, then five URLs will be
generated, one for each.

You can do other simple checks inside the template to decide whether
or not to make an xref.  Take this trivial example:

  [% IF object.map_type_accession=='Genetic' %]http://www.genetic-maps.org/search=[% object.map_name %][% END %]

This template checks to see if the object (probably a map) is of the
type "Genetic."  If so, it creates a URL querying on the map's name;
otherwise it returns nothing, in which case the xref is discarded by
CMap.  

If may want to define an attribute that basically acts like a
"Yes/No" flag, e.g. "can_link_to_genbank => 1."  To use this attribute
in determining whether to create a link, you can do this:

  Name: View Genank Info
  URL : 
  [% IF object.attribute.defined('can_link_to_genbank') %]
    [% FOREACH id=object.attribute.genbank_id %]
      http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/viewer.fcgi?val=[% id %]
    [% END %]
  [% END %]

=head1 OBJECT-SPECIFIC XREFS

In addition to creating generic xrefs that apply to all objects of a
particular class, you can also create xrefs that apply only to one
specific object.  This is accomplished by drilling down to a view of
the object in question (e.g., a map set or a map or a correspondence
evidence) through the web admin interface and then clicking the "Add
XRef" link under the cross-references section (if the link is not
available, then you are not allowed to create an xref on the object).
The top part of the form to create the xref will reflect the type of
your database object and its name.  Simply fill in the xref name and
URL, which can be a template or a simple string, e.g.:

  Name: View Marker Details
  URL : /db/markers/marker_view?marker_name=CDO590

You can also import attributes and xrefs for features using a
tab-delimited text file and the cmap_admin.pl tool.  For more
information, see the documentation for importing data.

=head1 PROBLEMS WITH ATTRIBUTES

One possible problem with this generic attribute system is with the
fact that they are much less searchable than might at first appear.
To begin with, the "attribute_value" field is generally going to be
the largest text data type for the underlying database (e.g., "text"
for MySQL, possibly CLOB for Oracle), and searching for arbitary
strings in those types of columns can be problematic.  Additionally,
the values will always be stored as strings, so if the attribute were
"Molecular Weight" and the value were meant to be floating-point
values, it would not be easy to find all the features with a molecular
weight greater than some value.  To execute this type of search, all
the attributes of with the name "Molecular Weight" and the table name
of "cmap_feature" would have to be pulled into Perl, the values
converted to numbers and the search done in code.  Given that this
would require foreknowledge of the field names and data types, there
is no easy way to program an interface that could necessarily allow
powerful searching for objects using this generic attribute system.

I imagine it will also be very easy for curators to abuse the
attributes to store all sorts of data that really shouldn't go there.
However, with the above caveat having been stated, I'm not interested
in stopping a creative curator from using the system however he sees
fit.  To paraphrase a quote I recently read, "UNIX won't stop you from
doing stupid things as it would also stop you from doing clever
things."

=head1 SEE ALSO

Template::Manual.

=head1 AUTHOR

Ken Y. Clark E<lt>kclark@cshl.orgE<gt>
