=head1 TITLE

CMap Code Overview

=head1 VERSION

$Revision: 1.10 $

CMap is a CGI application for viewing comparative and genetic maps.
Written entirely in Perl, this application will run on many different
operating systems and relational database management systems (RDBMS),
including Oracle, MySQL, Sybase and PostgreSQL.  CMap can create
images using "libgd" for standard image formats like PNG and JPEG as
well as creating SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics).  The code was
originally written for the Gramene project (http://www.gramene.org/),
a comparative mapping resource for crop grasses, but much has been
done to make the application generic enough to be used with many
different types of data.

=head1 ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW

Care has been given to carefully separate functionally different parts
of the code into different modules, roughly corresponding to a
traditional "three-tiered" structure of layers for the data, the
logic, and the presentation layers.  You'll find all the database
interaction encapsulated into the Bio::GMOD::CMap::Data* modules, all
the "logic" (the code that lays out the map components) in the
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Drawer* modules, and all the HTML generation in the
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache* modules.  

=head1 DATA MODULES

As stated above, all the database interaction happens in the
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Data* modules.  One goal of this project has always
been compatibility with multiple RDBMSs (perhaps if only from
necessity, as the system was developed using MySQL but is deployed on
Oracle).  As a consequence, all the SQL will be placed (eventually)
into object-oriented modules where the statements can be sub-classed
and modified to run with a particular database without affecting any
other SQL.

The Bio::GMOD::CMap::Data module has as a component an "SQL" object,
with the choices right now confined to
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Data::[Generic|Oracle].  The "Generic" module
is the superclass of the other two (and conceivably any others, such
as classes for PostgreSQL, Sybase, etc.).  All SQL statement methods
are defined in the Generic module, and any that don't work for a
particular RDBMS can be overridden in a subclass.  This also allows
users of other systems to create their own modules and drop them into
place with very little effort.  All that need happen is to subclass
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Data::Generic (as noted in the perldocs), and then
add a line to the Bio::GMOD::CMap::Constants to point to the new
module.

=head1 LOGIC MODULES

All the modules that actually do something toward laying out the
comparative maps live in the Bio::GMOD::CMap::Drawer* namespace.  The top
level, "Drawer.pm," is basically the coordinator of the objects it
manipulates.  The Drawer creates a "Map" object for each map (or map
set) that the user has requested.  It asks each Map to lay itself out,
then it adjusts the frame, and writes the image to a file.  It then is
able to tell the calling object the filename of the image and its
height and width.

Eventually other modules should fall within this classification,
especially the module for administrative functions such as creating
and editing maps sets, maps, features, correspondences, etc.  All of
those functions are currently spread around in the
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Admin and Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache::AdminViewer
modules and the cmap_admin.pl script.  Eventually I hope to move all
the logic into Bio::GMOD::CMap::Admin and have the web- and
command-line interfaces simply invoke methods on this Admin object.

=head1 PRESENTATION MODULES

The modules in the Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache namespace are responsible
for actually displaying the maps through a web interface.  All of the
modules are basic Perl classes and are objects inheriting from
the Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache superclass.  This superclass creates the
Template Toolkit object, the "page" object (see perldocs), and handles
any errors thrown by the derived classes, reducing the amount of code
to create a new handler.

You'll notice that there is no HTML mixed with Perl code as all the
web pages are generated with the Template Toolkit Perl module
(http://www.template-toolkit.com/) written by Andy Wardley.  Template
Toolkit is powerful and freely available Perl templating system, and
the hope is that by using it, non-technical people who want to tweak
the HTML to do so without interfering with the code.

=head1 CONFIGURATION MODULES

There is Bio::GMOD::CMap::Config which handles the reading in and parsing of
the config files.

All local configuration of CMap should be done through the "cmap.conf"
directory.  Of course, the directory doesn't have to be called "cmap.conf."  It
can be called whatever you like, so long as the absolute path to the
directory is in the Bio::GMOD::CMap::Constants file.  This path is
automatically written during installation if you do the standard "perl
Build.PL; ./Build; ./Build install" process.  

There are now two types of config files.  There is the "global.conf" that
handles information that all the data sources need, like the default data
source.  There is also one config file for each data source.  This file is
handles most of the configurable options.

There are defaults provided for most every option in the local config file with
the exception of the database connection info and the template and image cache
directories.  The latter two should be set during installation, and the first
should be set by the installer after installation (they are promted to do this
after "./Build install").  If you comment out any of the options in "cmap.conf"
(except "database," "template_dir" and "cache_dir"), there are defaults in the
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Constants file.

Feature, map and evidence types are now defined and controlled in the data
source config files.

=head1 GENERAL FLOW FOR HANDLERS

The web presentation modules are all located under the
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache namespace and are instantiated as objects.  In
order to understand how they are invoked, I will describe how the main
map viewer (Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache::MapViewer) works.

=over 4

=item *

A user goes to "/cgi-bin/cmap/viewer" with a browser.

=item *

The "cmap" CGI script passes control to Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache.

=item *

Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache inspects the "path_info" and sees that the
user is asking for the "viewer." It looks up an internal table to see
if that is a valid path. It is, so the module then instantiates an
object of the proper type (in this case,
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Apache::MapViewer) which is a subclass to handle the
request. Control is then passed to the new object.

=item *

The module needs some data for the <form> elements it has, so it calls
the appropriate methods Bio::GMOD::CMap::Data module for what it
needs.

=item *

If there are enough arguments to display a map, it will create a
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Drawer object. The drawer will call the
Bio::GMOD::CMap::Data object for the data it needs to draw the map(s)
(features, relationships, map titles, etc.), layout all the map
elements, and finally write the image out to a temporary file.

=item *

If the image is created properly, then the drawer passes back to the
map viewer handler the name of the map image and the coordinates on
the map of elements (to make the image clickable) that the browser
needs to display the map.

=item *

If all goes well, then the handler uses Template Toolkit to format the
HTML so that the user sees a map that they can click on to see other
things.

=back

The above scenario is probably the most involved process in the
comparative maps, but it shows the way that distinct pieces of the
problem are split into specialized modules and objects.

=head1 SQL CONVENTIONS

The tables used by the comparative maps follow a fairly rigid naming
convention so that they should be able to integrate easily with existing
databases.

=over 4

=item *

Every table used by the comparative maps begins with the prefix
"cmap_" so that it would be highly unlikely that table names would
conflict with those in an existing database.

=item *

Tables are always named in the singular ("cmap_feature" not
"cmap_features").

=item *

Every descriptor (table, field, index names, etc.) is named in lower
case letters (and some numbers) with underscores separating words.
Additionally, certain conventions are followed for fields according to
their function:

=over 4 

=item - Primary key: 

The primary key of the table is always defined as the first field in the table
(though the first field in a table is not always guaranteed to be the primary
key). A table's primary key will be the name of the table minus the "cmap_"
prefix and the token "_id." So, for example, the table "cmap_feature" has as
its primary key "feature_id." Additionally, the primary key of a table will
always be an ascending integer value (like MySQL's "auto_increment" field, only
handled in Perl code so as to be portable to databases without such types of
fields). This naming convention is never used for any other type of field
except the "accession id", which is exampled by "feature_acc" . It is always
obvious the type and purpose of any field ending in "_id": if it is the same
name as the table, then it is a primary key, else it is a foreign key.

=item - Boolean fields: 

Since not all databases have a boolean datatype ("Yes/No," "On/Off"
kind of data), the fields that hold this kind of data are declared
using a small integer datatype (e.g., "tinyint" in MySQL). Names of
boolean fields include a verb indicating something that the records
"is" or "has" (or "can" or "wants" or whatever) some value, always in
the affirmative, e.g. "is_relational_map."

=item - Date-time fields: 

Date-time fields will be named like "*_on," e.g., "published_on."

=back

=item *

There are no stored procedures or referential integrity (RI)
constraints at the database level (apart from primary key and some
unique indices/constraints). This is intentional in order to make the
code portable to RDBMSs which don't fully support such features (such
as MySQL, one of the databases used in the development of the code).
All such logic and RI is addressed in the Perl code (for better or
worse).

=item * Table Aliases: 

When writing queries using multiple tables, a query uses table aliases, e.g.:

  select map.map_name,
         f.feature_start,
  from   cmap_map map,
         cmap_feature f
  where  upper(f.feature_name)=?
  and    f.map_id=map.map_id

=item * Placeholders: 

Whenever possible, placeholders are used in the SQL instead of direct
variable substitution. The only places where this is not feasible is
in "IN" statements [e.g., "foo_id in (1,2,3)"].  The advantages are
numerous, the biggest being that the database ends up correctly
quoting and escaping your parameters.

=back

=head1 TABLE DESCRIPTIONS

In the "docs" directory, you will find a schema diagram illustrating
the structure and relationships of the tables.  In the "sql"
directory, you will find create statements of the tables for MySQL,
Oracle and PostgreSQL.  Following is a general description of each
table, what kind of data it is supposed to hold, and how it fits in
with the others.  Most of the fields in the tables are described more
fully in the ADMINSTRATION document when discussing the forms
presented in the web admin tool.

=over 4

=item * cmap_map_set: 

Arguably the "base" table, a "map set" is a collection of "maps,"
which themselves are just points on a line. The map set can be disabled
(effectively removing it from all views) by setting the "is_enabled"
field to zero.

=item * cmap_map_type (depricated): 

This table has been removed and it's functionality moved to the config
file and other tables.

Maps are of some type determined by the data curator.  It is useful to
researchers to know that a map is a "genetic" map and that the
distances given are in "centiMorgans" as opposed to a "physical" map
where the distances are "bands." More importantly, though, the curator
can decide how different maps are drawn so as to make them visually
distinctive. By selecting from shapes, colors and widths, the curator
has great discretion over the presentation of maps. Additionally, the
curator can determine if the maps can stand alone (like most genetic
maps) or if they are a special kind of map set that CMap calls
"relational," meaning that the maps can only be shown *in relation to*
some other map (of the first, "non-relational" kind, no less).
Examples of this include physical fingerprint contig maps (FPC), QTLs,
and haplotypes. These maps are usually composed of many smaller
fragments that have some correspondences to other maps. As such, they
are just drawn to a size relative to the distance their
=======
some other map.  Examples of this include physical fingerprint contig
maps (FPC), QTLs, and haplotypes. These maps are usually composed of
many smaller fragments that have some correspondences to other maps.
As such, they are just drawn to a size relative to the distance their
>>>>>>> 1.3
correspondences cover on the reference map.

=item * cmap_species: 

A fairly obvious table, given that we hold genetic data. Map sets are
tied to a species.

=item * cmap_map: 

Like a "map" from Picayune to New Orleans might tell you that the
distance is 50 miles and that there is a coffee shop on exit 3, a map
says that it is some measure of distance long and that some "feature"
can be found at some location.

=item * cmap_map_cache (depricated): 

This table has been removed.

This is a "permanent temp" table used only to speed up the web
queries.  It is used to remember which maps occur in each of the
"slots" while collating the data used to draw the maps for each
request.  The requests are identified by the PID (process ID) of the
Apache child serving the user, and the requests *should* be deleted
after the request has finished.  Records have a timestamp that
indicates the age of the request.  If you see records in this table
that are older than even a few minutes, it should be safe to delete
them.

=item * cmap_feature: 

This is the "something" that occurs on a map. It has a name and a
starting position. The feature may span, in which case it will have a
stop position, too. Certain features can be designated as being
"landmarks," and the user can decide to only view landmarks so as to
make the maps simpler.

=item * cmap_feature_alias:

Holds any number of alternate names for each feature.

=item * cmap_attribute: 

This table allows you to attach any arbitrary key/value pair of data
to almost any database object.  See the "attributes-and-xrefs.pod"
document for more information.

=item * cmap_feature_type (depricated): 

This table has been removed and it's functionality moved to the config
file and other tables.

Each feature is of some type. What particular types of features exist
are completely determined by the data curator. The data curator
decides how to draw the feature on the map, selecting from
pre-determined shapes and colors.

=item * cmap_feature_correspondence: 

The whole point of comparative maps is to show the relationships among
maps. These correspondences are all held in this table, and they
simply state that one feature is related to another. The
correspondence can be disabled by setting the "is_enabled" field to
zero.

=item * cmap_correspondence_evidence: 

This table holds the reasons why we can say that one feature has some
correspondence to another. There may be several reasons, each of a
different type, optionally with some sort of score.

=item * cmap_evidence_type: 

This table has been removed and it's functionality moved to the config
file and other tables.

These are the types of evidence that we can use in the previous table.
For instance, we can say two features are related because they have
the same name or the same sequence. Some evidences are stronger than
others, so they can be ranked accordingly.

=item * cmap_correspondence_lookup: 

This is sort of a cheater table introduced in order to make it easier
to find correspondences. It doubles the number of records for any
single correspondence. E.g., if "foo" corresponds to "bar," then two
records go into this table, one saying "foo=>bar" and the other saying
"bar=>foo" and both pointing to the "canonical" correspondence record
in the "cmap_feature_correspondence" table.

=item * cmap_correspondence_matrix: 

This is another cheater table used to make lookups of feature
correspondences fast. The idea is that correspondences don't often
change, so it's quicker and easier to pre-compute all the possible
combinations for the matrix and cache them in a table. Everytime a the
number of correspondences changes for any reason, it is necessary to
manually reload this table using the cmap_admin.pl tool.

=item * cmap_xref: 

This table holds database cross-references which can attach to
individual database objects (just like attributes) or to whole classes
of objects.  See "attributes-and-xrefs.pod" for more information.

=item * cmap_next_number: 

This table stores the next number for the primary key of every table
needing such. It's basically a simple workaround for MySQL's
"auto_increment" feature, Oracle's "sequence" type, PostgreSQL's
"serial" type, etc. By implementing this in Perl, I don't have to
worry how (or even "if") a particular RDBMS supports a "one-up" field.

=back

=head1 TIPS

If you'd like to write a script to access the database directly, you
can get a handle to the database quite easily using the
Bio::GMOD::CMap modules.  Here's an example:

  #!/usr/bin/perl

  use strict;
  use Bio::GMOD::CMap;

  my $cmap = Bio::GMOD::CMap->new or die Bio::GMOD::CMap->error;

  # optional, only if you have muliple data sources defined
  # $cmap->data_source('Foo'); 

  my $db = $cmap->db or die $cmap->error;

=head1 AUTHOR

Ken Y. Clark, kclark@cshl.edu
Ben Faga, faga@cshl.edu

Copyright (c) 2002-5 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
