# vim: tw=70:

=pod

=head1 NAME

Object Plugins

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Wherein we discuss how to extend the various "details" pages in CMap
to add custom data drawn from various and sundry external resources.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

As has been discussed in the "attributes" document, CMap stores almost
no biological information about the various objects (map sets,
species, features, etc.).  The "attributes" system does allow the
curator to define any number of arbitrary name/value pairs of data
(e.g., a "GenBank ID" for a feature or an "NCBI Taxon ID" for a
species), and these attributes can be used by the cross-reference
system to create novel and powerful dbxrefs.  However, storing
attributes such as these in all likelihood duplicates information
stored elsewhere, which is almost never a Good Thing (tm).

One solution is to define a way for CMap to execute user-defined code
that can manipulate any of the objects for which there is a "details"
page (e.g., map sets have the "map_set_info" page, features have the
"feature" page).  As with most of the other user-configurable items in
CMap, the user will define this code in the database-specific
configuration files.  The code must be written in Perl (the language
in which CMap is written).  Two methods for defining the code,
"in-line" in the config file or in a separate module, follow and are
illustrated in this example:

  <object_plugin>
      map_set_info <<EOF
          sub {
              my $map_set = shift;
              $map_set->{'foo'} = 'bar';
              push @{ $map_set->{'xrefs'} }, {
                  xref_name => 'Google',
                  xref_url  => "http://www.google.com/?q=".
                      $map_set->{'short_name'}
              };
          
              push @{ $map_set->{'attributes'} }, {
                  attribute_name  => 'Favorite Color',
                  attribute_value => 'Blue. No, red! Ahhhhh!',
              };
          }
      EOF
      feature Gramene::Marker::Marker2CMap::new
  </object_plugin>

As is shown above, the user has the ability to directly manipulate the
given object (in this case, the map set).  In all cases, the "object"
will be a Perl hash reference data structure -- the same one, in fact,
that is given to the template for the "details" page.  This hashref
will always be the first (and only) argument to the plugin code.  Your
code should alter the hashref to add new cross-references ("xrefs"),
attributes, or even new fields.

The above example also shows adding a new field "foo" with the value
"bar."  If you wish this value to be displayed on the "map_set_info"
page, you would have to alter the "map_set_info.tmpl" template.  It's
probably much easier to simply add to hashref's "attributes" or
"xrefs" as all the templates are designed to show these and will have
to be altered to display other fields (and your changes could be lost
the next time you update CMap).

The "attributes" and "xrefs" fields of the hashref are themselves
arrayrefs of hashrefs.  If that sounds scary, it's really not.  In
short, the thing you add to ("push") should be a hashref with the
following fields:

  attribute
    attribute_name : The type of attribute, e.g., the phrase "GenBank ID"
    attribute_value: The data, e.g., the actual GenBank ID

  xref
    xref_name: The text that user will click on for the link
    xref_url : The location where the user will go after clicking

As long as you define the "attributes" and "xrefs" with these fields
and copy the above syntax for "push"ing them onto the appropriate
fields (and all hashrefs will have these), your code should work just
fine.

Following is more discussion on defining the plugin code.

=over 4

=item 1 IN-LINE SUB

The "map_set_info" example above show that you can define an anonymous
subroutine "in-line" in the config file.  Note the use of the "HERE
document" syntax ("<<EOF"..."EOF") to define a config value that spans
multiple lines.

=item 2 NAME OF EXTERNAL MODULE AND SUBROUTINE

The "feature" example above shows how to reference an external module
and subroutine, in this case "Gramene::Marker::Marker2CMap::new."
"new" is the name of a defined subroutine in the module
"Gramene::Marker::Marker2CMap.pm."  This module must live in some
library path that CMap has access to.  (It's probably easiest to add a
"use lib" statement to the Apache "perl.startup" file or to put your
code into the standard Perl library path.)  Some advantages to defining
code in external modules:

=over 4

=item *

Keeps the config file lighter.

=item *

Allows for easy reuse of code for different object types and over
different config files.

=back

Here is an example of the "Gramene::Marker::Marker2CMap" module:

  package Gramene::Marker::Marker2CMap;
  
  use strict;
  use Gramene::Marker::DB;
  
  sub new {
      my $feature = shift;
      my $mdb     = Gramene::Marker::DB->new;
  
      my @markers;
      for my $name ( 
          $feature->{'feature_name'}, 
          ( map { $_->{'alias'} } @{ $feature->{'aliases'} } )
      ) {
          my $found = $mdb->marker_search( 
              marker_name => $name 
          ) or next;
          push @markers, @$found;
      }
  
      my $xref_url = '/db/markers/marker_view?marker_id=';
      for my $m ( @markers ) {
          push @{ $feature->{'xrefs'} }, {
              xref_name => 
                  "View &quot;$m->{'name'}&quot; in Marker DB",
              xref_url  => $xref_url . $m->{'marker_id'},
          };
      }
  }
  
  1;

Notice that it's simply a standard Perl package, starting with the
proper "package" declaration and returning a "true" value at the end,
"1;" in this case.  The "Gramene::Marker::DB" module is used to search
for the CMap feature in the marker name, looking with the feature's
primary name and any aliases.  For each marker (if any) that are
found, a new cross-reference is created using the a relative URL
("/db/markers...") and defining an informative link text and proper
URL.  If it were desired, CMap could define for the feature new
attributes based upon the field names and data from the markers found
in the marker database, thereby allowing the CMap user full access to
the marker information without leaving the CMap interface and without
duplicating the marker data as CMap attributes.

=back

=head1 PLUGIN NAMES AND FIELDS

The following are the names to use for each object (they are the same
as the "handler" for the object).  For each hashref, you can always
add ("push") attributes and xrefs.  If you wish to have the specific
"details" page display a visually structured dump of the object's data
structure, you can use this snippet (here for a "feature"):

  <object_plugin>
      feature <<EOF
          sub {
              use Data::Dumper;
              my $obj = shift;
              push @{ $obj->{'attributes'} }, {
                  attribute_name => 'Dump',
                  attribute_value  => '<pre>'.Dumper($obj).'</pre>'
              };
          }
      EOF
  </object_plugin>

This will cause a new attribute called "Dump" to be created with a
value of the return of the standard Perl module Data::Dumper's
"Dumper" method in "PRE"-formatted HTML tags.

For each object type, following are the plugin names to use (in
parentheses) and the hashref's fields you can use:

=head2 Map Set (map_set_info)

  can_be_reference_map
  common_name
  full_name
  is_relational_map
  map_set_aid
  map_set_id
  map_set_name
  map_type
  map_type_aid
  map_units
  object_id
  published_on
  short_name
  species_aid
  species_id

=head2 Map (map_details)

  map_aid
  map_name
  map_set_aid
  map_set_name
  map_type_aid
  map_units
  object_id
  species_aid
  species_name
  start
  start_position
  stop
  stop_position

=head2 Feature (feature)

  aliases
  attributes
  feature_aid
  feature_id
  feature_name
  feature_type
  feature_type_aid
  is_landmark
  map_aid
  map_id
  map_name
  map_set_aid
  map_set_id
  map_set_name
  map_type_aid
  map_units
  object_id
  species_aid
  species_id
  species_name
  start_position
  stop_position

=head2 Feature Type (feature_type_info)

  color
  feature_type
  feature_type_aid
  shape

=head2 Map Type (map_type_info)

  color
  display_order
  is_relational_map
  map_type
  map_type_aid
  map_units
  shape
  width

=head2 Evidence Type (evidence_type_info)

  evidence_type
  evidence_type_aid
  line_color
  rank

=head2 Species (species_info)

  common_name
  display_order
  full_name
  species_aid
  species_id

=head1 AUTHOR

Ken Youens-Clark E<lt>kclark@cshl.eduE<gt>.

=cut
